trope_name|trope_url|trope_description
Alternate Identity Amnesia|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/AlternateIdentityAmnesia|"This trope is about characters with a form of Involuntary Shapeshifting or Superpowered Evil Side that causes them to suffer amnesia whenever they transform to their alternate form or self. Typically this trope is most often used in media with werewolves (or any other sort of werecreatures), though characters with a Jekyll And Hyde style Split Personality, Demonic Possession, Mind Control, or an Enemy Within may also suffer from this form of amnesia. When it happens it may be immediately noticeable to the character; they will freak out at suffering blackouts and waking up naked in a field, covered in blood, and surrounded by animal carcasses.note(hopefully it'll be just animal carcasses; human body parts are also a distinct possibility)
 In some cases the amnesiac lycanthrope actually suffers a combination of Laser-Guided Amnesia and Weirdness Censor about the Missing Time; they might spend weeks, months or years unaware of their condition. It helps if they transition into a type of ""sleepwalker"" that walks home and cleans up post transformation. The smarter the alternate form is the likelier this is to happen, since it'll likely want its host to stay unawares as long as possible.
 One dangerous possibility is for characters to become a Zombie Infectee who willfully ignores or rationalizes away any evidence, symptoms, and lost memories. Whether they cop to it or not, expect Amnesiac Dissonance to kick in once they feel the weight of their crimes.
 Typically the memories are merely repressed and come back in a Past Experience Nightmare flashback sequence. If the lycanthopy can be controlled, then learning to do so usually enables the character to remember past events as well as remain lucid and in control during future ones. Occasionally the memories really are irrecoverable, usually if the character is essentially comatose while someone/thing else is in control.
 The explanation for the blackouts is usually that ""the wolf"" has taken over and puts the character to sleep or in the passenger's seat. It's worth noting that the alternate identity isn't necessarily hostile to the character note(indeed, they usually depend on them to exist, save for cases where they plan to pull a Split-Personality Takeover) and in these cases both personalities may try desperately to find means to communicate.
 Contrast And I Must Scream, when the lycanthrope is aware of what's going on but helpless to stop their wolf-self. Compare What Did I Do Last Night?, the alcohol-induced version. Compare The Killer in Me, especially the ""Amnesiac Killer"" type. Compare Trauma-Induced Amnesia, which is also fairly common in disassociative disorders. Compare also Identity Amnesia and Amnesiac Dissonance.
 This is probably the most ""realistic"" presentation of classic multiple personality/dissociative identity disorder  the individual identities may not be aware of the existence or experiences of the other identities, and consequently suffer from time disturbances. It's one of the most frightening things about Real Life multiplicity, especially considering its use in this trope, to the point of stereotype. People in real life who know they're multiple may not come out even to close friends, fearing it's the first thing that'll come to mind. Amnesia is also not true for all real-life multiples across the board, and if someone tells you they do know what their other selves said and did, they are likely telling you the truth. Today's psychotherapy for multiples focuses not on fusion but on communication. Many have worked out their own system, leaving notes or voicemails for one another."
Enemy Within|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/EnemyWithin|"A specific form of Split Personality. Maybe the Body Horror became a bit too fused with someone. Maybe the Unstoppable Rage is getting... too unstoppable. Perhaps The Atoner's past is taking on a life of its own. A half-human's Demon / Vampire self is trying to take control, or that Deal with the Devil is hitting a bit too close to home.
 Either way, the enemy is behind the hero's eyes, and its time is coming when it can take over. Until then, it'll do all it can to control him and get him to give in to its Horror Hunger. The thing to stress most is that the Enemy Within is the hero. He or she cannot simply exorcise it out. Often the Enemy Within is the cause of the powers that the hero has that allows them to do what they do. With Great Power Comes Great Insanity, remember?
 Often, since Evil Is Cool and Evil Feels Good, other characters may realize the danger before the hero and need to convince him.
 This trope has received criticism from the mental health community, as it is accused of demonising patients with Dissociative Identity Disorder (or DID), and being seen as one of the reasons for stigmatization against people with DID due to its constant use in media. This was most notably seen in the backlash against Split (2016), whose potrayal of DID was seen by many to be VERY damaging.
 Not to be confused with the expansion pack to the X-Com reboot, nor an unrelated TV series, or another unrelated novel. Contrast Enemy Without. Compare Jekyll & Hyde. Also not to be confused with Kill It Through Its Stomach, which involves an enemy literally inside another. Usually part of their Soul Anatomy."
Enemy Without|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/EnemyWithout|"When someone's inner darkness doesn't quite take over someone, but it does ""escape"" their body and rampage. Fighting someone else's Enemy Without is tricky, as often it will either kill the person projecting it if it dies, or it will just resurrect itself until the actual darkness in the hero's heart is dealt with by the hero themselves.
 Often symbolically represents repression, and the hero's refusal to acknowledge the darkness within or some other aspect of themselves. Victory is achieved half the time via ""reintegrating"" with it. The other half of of the time it can be seen as representing some inner demon, and thus, it must be abandoned, purged, or confronted and conquered.
 Sometimes this battle will occur inside someone's own head in a dreamscape, making it both the Enemy Within and the Enemy Without at the same time. It may require saying ""I'm Not Afraid of You!"" to weaken it enough to beat.
 This trope is very similar to The Heartless, Made of Evil, and Literal Split Personality. It is distinguished from The Heartless by having some personal connection to the person/people it was created from, from Made of Evil because the Enemy may be flesh and bone, and from Literal Split Personality by leaving behind a clearly-defined original character.
 See also: Evil Twin, Enemy Within, Ghost in the Machine, Self-Constructed Being, Shadow Archetype, Indulgent Fantasy Segue, Mental Monster, Tulpa, Powering Villain Realization, and Residual Evil Entity. Very dangerous in combination with Superpowered Evil Side.
The ""evil"" is usually part of a character's Soul Anatomy."
Evil Brunette Twin|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/EvilBrunetteTwin|"Occasionally, works will reverse the usual set-up, and reveal that a brunette villain has a nicer light-haired twin, though this technically plays the trope straight.
 A Sub-Trope of Evil Twin. See also Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold, Hair-Contrast Duo, and Dark Is Evil."
Evil Feels Good|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/EvilFeelsGood|"No one understands Evil Is Cool better than the hero with a Superpowered Evil Side. Once their inner Hyde is unleashed, they become nearly invincible, all but immune to pain, and stronger and more powerful than all the Applied Phlebotinum and Training from Hell in the world could make them. Is it any wonder they get Drunk on the Dark Side?
 But the effect on their body is just a fringe benefit to the effect on their mind. Their conscience just shuts up. They're free to break all the rules, do anything they want. No more scruples, no morals, no inhibitors to hold them back from tearing their arch enemy to shreds. And it feels good.
 Often a motivation for For the Evulz, although For the Evulz doesn't have to involve the character even enjoying the evil they do  they just do it because it's evil.
 For many a hero with a Split Personality, that's the scariest thing about their Unstoppable Rage or Enemy Within  realizing that, deep down, they like it...
 The reason people take Psycho Serum. Cue This Is Your Brain on Evil. Because being bad felt so good, this often leads villains into Reminiscing About Your Victims. When it can be acted out within a video game, this is Video Game Cruelty Potential. Counterpart to Good Feels Good. Usually pit against Being Good Sucks. May have a horrible hangover when Being Evil Sucks. This can also overlap with Card-Carrying Villain and is one of the defining traits of a sociopath.
 Compare Fame Through Infamy when evil feels good because of the ""fame"" it brings."
Evil Twin|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/EvilTwin|"Two family members (who happen to look identical) who are moral opposites of one another. Typically done with literal twins, these characters are of the same generation, but may have been raised as ""cousins"", or even completely separated from one another. It's especially popular in a Soap Opera, where they can use an Identical Twin Mistake to wreak havoc with their Good Twin's life.
 Typically the evil twin will be portrayed by the same actor as the regular character. It's worth noting that in the overwhelming majority of cases the twin is evil; only rarely does an evil character suddenly find themselves contending with a good twin, and in those cases the good version is often simpleminded or purely comic. See Good Is Impotent and Impersonating the Evil Twin.
 The evil twin may attempt to convince their good twin that they aren't so different, saying We Can Rule Together and that the good twin's friends are holding them back from greatness. This often ends with a Mirror Match as neither one will be able to convince the other of their ideology. After the fight, their allies will usually need to Spot the Imposter to figure out who won.
 A goatee or other beard is less common for Evil Twins than they are for typical Evil Counterpart examples, because it distorts the use of Always Identical Twins. However, other Identical Twin ID Tag tropes are still used to differentiate between the good/evil twins, such as scars and evil costuming. Very often, one twin will be right-handed and the other left-handed. Guess which one's which.
 This trope is Played for Laughs when both twins are evil, or when a character on the side of the good guys has a good twin show up, implying that the original is the evil one. Sub-Trope of Always Identical Twins (siblings are Doppelgangers), Evil Counterpart (any evil Foil to a character), and Evil Doppelgnger (someone who is both a Doppelgnger and Evil Counterpart). Sister Trope to Evil Knockoff (intentionally created evil duplicate), Cain and Abel (non-twin siblings where one is good and the other is evil), and Criminal Doppelgnger (evil Identical Stranger). Super-Trope to Evil Brunette Twin, where the Always Identical Twins have different hair colours (and the darker one is evil).
 If you were looking for the video game Evil Twin: Cyprien's Chronicles, it can be found here.
 Not to Be Confused with Creepy Twins, which is about twins (usually identical) who are disturbing, usually equally evil."
Flip Personality|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/FlipPersonality|"They've caught a Body Snatcher or Symbiote, or are Sharing a Body, and you can tell, because they're obviously switching between minds repeatedly. Often accompanied by changes in manner, posture, voice, or eye color or shape. Those not aware of the circumstances and not sufficiently well acquainted with the originally one-minded character may not notice the change, leading to much opportunity for hilarity to ensue.
 Having arguments with yourself is strictly optional, but again, hilarious."
Funny Schizophrenia|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/FunnySchizophrenia|"In Real Life, mental illness of any kind is never a laughing matter. In media, however, it can be played with for humor. When a character swings wildly back and forth between different versions of himself, it's almost always used this way.
 It's also far too often referred to as ""schizophrenia""; while the word literally means ""split mind"", Psychology Marches On and schizophrenia is a complicated condition affecting perception of realitynoteoften featuring hallucinations (usually auditory, aka hearing voices) and delusions (often but not always paranoid). There are other aspects to it, like disordered thinking, but the losing touch with reality (psychosis) is the most important part., while ""dissociative identity disorder"" is the actual condition relating to Split Personality.
 See also Talking to Themself, The Schizophrenia Conspiracy (a Self-Demonstrating Article about the portrayal of the disease), and Insane Equals Violent, another widespread myth about psychosis."
Ghost Memory|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/GhostMemory|A character gets others' memories or abilities through some external means, like magic or... ghosts. Compare with Genetic Memory, which uses genetics, reincarnation, and whatnot. Or Fake Memories, in which the implanted memory is totally made up. Contrast Death Amnesia. Not to be confused with Ghost Amnesia, which is when a ghost can not remember their own memories. Can intersect with Transferable Memory. Also compare Shared Dream, when both characters get the memory/dream at the same time. May explain becoming an Instant Expert.
Gollum Made Me Do It|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/GollumMadeMeDoIt|"A character has another personality to keep him company, but has a problem: the other personality isn't exactly a model citizen. However, he is... persuasive. More often than not he finds himself being bullied or coerced into following his darker half's advice, even if it's advice he wouldn't have followed normally. This is in contrast to the conventional Split Personality, where each exists without the knowledge of the other, though in this case this will still sometimes be true to an extent.
 Of course, even if the character doesn't really have a Split Personality, making people think they do is a common opening gambit if they're planning to make an Insanity Defense (or just to get the hero to let his guard down). And if you're looking at a guy pleading with you to save him from his evil other half, how are you gonna tell the difference?
 You'll usually find such a character Talking to Themself, sometimes pleading with himself, trying to convince, warn or downright resist his other half.
 In terms of personality types, expect the evil half to be a dominant, forceful, assertive type, and the good half to be more moral and reluctant to hurt people, which the evil half will see as weak. Getting the weak half to reassert control usually requires it face the evil half by saying something along the lines of ""I'm Not Afraid of You!""
 Related to Enemy Within, and can lead to a Split-Personality Takeover or a Split-Personality Merge. See also Jekyll & Hyde. Can be invoked or exploited by a character with Never My Fault mentality."
The Hat Makes the Man|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TheHatMakesTheMan|"Sometimes, the type of hat a person wears can tell you a lot about their personality. However, these hats go a step beyond and noticeably alter the personality of their wearer.
 The hat (or other headgear, like helmet or crown) may be a form of personality-altering Applied Phlebotinum. Particularly bad cases may function more like Demonic Possession, with the hat completely overwriting the wearer's personality. Or the hat may simply be a Magic Feather, giving the character the boost of self-confidence necessary to alter their behavior. However it works, the character's behavior is markedly different when they wear it.
 A subtrope of Artifact Domination. If the hat alters the wearer's behavior for the worse, then it's also an example of Clothes Make the Maniac. If it's used by someone else to control the wearer it's also a Hypno Trinket. If the hat grants special powers to the wearer, it's a Hat of Power. It has very little relationship to Planet of Hats."
Hearing Voices|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/HearingVoices|"Whenever characters start hearing the Voice of the Legion whisper in their ear, or the Black Speech dancing on the wind, there's something bad in store for them... and it comes in four flavors!  Insanity Berry, Evil Sauce, Good Mint, and Chaotic Neutral Licorice.
 Insane  Bob's completely lost his mind, but how can we make that plain to the audience? Simple  Have him mention hearing voices in his head, or depict him conversing with them. Closely related to Split Personality. If Bob is a telepath suffering from Power Incontinence, the voices may actually be the cause of his madness, rather than a symptom.
 Evil  The evil version can come from a lot of sources. Demonic Possession, nearby ghosts, Artifacts of Doom and Tomes of Eldritch Lore. The Demon/Spirit/Artifact(s) possessing Bob may serve as the ""evil"" shoulder angel, and rather than (or in addition to) forcing him to do evil, tells him to. As Bob realizes Evil Feels Good, the demon can then claim that it didn't make Bob do anything he didn't want to.
 Thanks to a deal with Trope Co., for an unlimited time, we've got two new flavors, Sour Good and Mystery flavor. Except in Nebraska, something about Trope Co. and several hundred liters of Psycho Serum.
 Good  The voices come from a higher power, often God or angels. Rather than compel Bob to go on a killing spree, they'll offer him guidance, and likely encourage pacifism. Or cause him to become a Knight Templar...
 Chaotic Neutral  It's often unknown where the voices are coming from, whether the source is holy, unholy, or neutral is never delved into. Or even Maybe Magic, Maybe Mundane. Alternatively, the voices come from a multitude of sources, some good, some evil.
 Interestingly, Bob may not actually be hearing voices  a common variation is for Alice to make him think he is, using a hidden radio transmitter or the like. If that's the case, see Gaslighting. Subtrope of Terrible Ticking, though they're usually implemented differently."
The Heartless|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TheHeartless|"The Heartless are monsters born out of people's negative emotions. They can be a special case of Body Horror, but can also be a part of the victim's Soul Anatomy that has been separated from them, and like a ghost they may not have a physical body at all  in which case, they may be considered a kind of Tulpa. This part of the soul may represent all of a person's animalistic desires without any of the restraint, similar to a Jekyll & Hyde situation, or all of their feelings of suffering, sadness, and anger condensed into a distinct figure. They can be a convenient Monster of the Week since they are an unlimited resource; there always seem to be plenty of victims loaded with problems and angst for The Heartless to feed on. They can also have a self-propagating ""zombie"" effect.
 The trouble for the heroes is that these are difficult to get rid of, especially if The Heartless still displays an awareness of the world (usually, as a ruse of the Enigmatic Minion). If an established character becomes one of The Heartless, they may act as if they have undergone a FaceHeel Turn.
 The All-Loving Hero's power is usually to combat The Heartless or even to heal them. The Anti-Hero or Well-Intentioned Extremist usually insists the victims are too far gone and should be put down before more people get hurt. Occasionally, a victim who is Fighting from the Inside can resist The Heartless' control.
 Depending on the context, this trope may be a subtrope of Abstract Apotheosis. This is because nearly every series that this trope is used in presents these critters as An Aesop about them being in everyone's hearts. Contrast/See also Made of Evil.
 Not to be confused with the Let's Player of the same name, the film Heartless (2009), or the single Heartless by Heart."
Helpless Good Side|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/HelplessGoodSide|"Sometimes, when a character has a Split Personality, or two people Sharing a Body, one of them is a total wimp. This can range from merely being incompetent in a combat situation to being unable to take care of their own basic needs, such as feeding themselves and not wetting themselves in public. Regardless, when these come out in a combat situation, the character tends to be royally screwed. If they're on a team, this can transform them from a badass into The Load. When the Big Bad does this, they may become a Zero-Effort Boss or Clipped-Wing Angel.
 Compare Good Is Impotent. Contrast Superpowered Evil Side, which sometimes goes hand in hand with this. Sometimes appears as a result of Easy Amnesia. In a world where Passion Is Evil, the Good side will be passive or emotionless."
Heroic Safe Mode|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/HeroicSafeMode|"Heroism is hazardous work for both the body and the mind: it's fairly common for heroes to end up facing at least one emotionally, mentally, or psychically charged event capable of causing a Heroic Blue Screen Of Death that temporarily renders them catatonic. Of course, this wouldn't be a gripping New York Times Best Seller if it didn't happen at the worst possible time to ramp up the tension as the audience is left hoping the Side Kick can protect the hero until he or she snaps out of it.
 Keeping the computing metaphor, some heroes have a heartier Operating System than the norm, which when faced with the Heroic BSoD instead enters Heroic Safe Mode. During this period the hero ""shuts down"" non-essential thought processes and focuses entirely on ""fight or flight"", hoping that when the danger is over they can ""restart"" in safety. Especially strong-willed heroes who go into Safe Mode while loved ones are in danger will usually protect them to near-suicidal extremes. In other cases, they may wind up snapping at their own friends who try to push them out of Safe Mode. Luckily, these loved ones can usually push the restart button with a Cooldown Hug. They will (at best) talk in monosyllables, become either completely emotionless or absolutely enraged, but they will always, always terrify friend and foe alike with an unfiltered Death Glare. When a hero fully reboots from this mode back into their standard operating procedure, Post-Victory Collapse usually kicks in, or the full-on Heroic BSoD may kick in after the direct danger to the hero and/or their companions has passed. It is often seen as the good counterpart of a Villainous Breakdown.
 Where this gets interesting is if the hero has a Split Personality or Adaptive Armor that is not normally in the driver's seat. With the hero ""out to lunch"", the passenger may decide to take survival into his, her or its own hands (neurons?) and control their body until the hero is well again. This varies depending on the nature of the Split Personality. For example, a soul-bound Empathic Weapon might default to Attack! Attack! Attack!, while a more evil Enemy Within might decide it's a good time to unlock the hero's Superpowered Evil Side.
 Once they reboot, they may well regret having not helped save someone, run away, or killed many dozens of mooks... but as friends will remind him, at least he (and they) are still alive.
 This is Truth in Television to a greater degree than a lot of Split Personality Tropes. Many traumatized people deal with their pain by creating a kind of secondary self who is less bothered by the pain because this self is just observing while ""that other self"" is actually experiencing the pain. This function may be one reason for the existence of the Real Life, non-Hollywood Psychology phenomenon of people who have a Split Personality. And people who are multiple in real life and usually operate as a Split-Personality Team may find that in a high-stress situation, some calmer or more competent individual may shove their way to the front and remain there for the duration.
 In a less extreme form, it is considered a healthy coping mechanism. People using this strategy to deal with dangerous or otherwise overwhelming situations will often say to themselves something like, ""I have to focus on survival right now. I'll deal with these feelings later."" This is different from repression because the person is not trying to forget or suppress emotions, only to delay dealing with them until it's safe to do so. People capable of shifting focus away from their own emotions, without suppressing them, are often very resilient; so this is a trait often seen in characters whose professions often take them into emotionally charged situations  soldiers, emergency workers, spies, police, superheroes, and similar.
 See also Superpowered Alter Ego, Defense Mechanism Superpower, and It Never Gets Any Easier."
Hyde Plays Jekyll|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/HydePlaysJekyll|"Sometimes, Mr. Hyde's not interested in making Dr. Jekyll do anything. He just needs a piece of information that he knows that Dr. Jekyll and all the other good guys have. Unfortunately, all of those good guys know that whatever Hyde's going to do with that information, it's not going to be good for them. What's a poor Superpowered Evil Side to do? Well, if he just claims to be his Helpless Good Side, he might be able to trick them, right? After all, it's not like they look any different from each other.
 This is when one part of a Split Personality intentionally tries to pretend to be the other half. Note that the two characters must be within one body in order for this trope to apply. Otherwise, it's Spot the Impostor or Twin Switch.
 In a way, this is perhaps the ultimate form of Spot the Impostor, since there aren't even two bodies to let the others know that there definitely is, in fact, an imposter. Just two minds, and if one mind has the other's mannerisms down pat, it can be very difficult for others to figure it out. The best way to beat it tends to be by Fighting from the Inside or noticing Something Only They Would Say or an Out-of-Character Alert.
 Notwithstanding the description above, any personality might do this. The Superpowered Evil Side might try this in order to get the good guys to let their guard down and let him get at the Applied Phlebotinum. A Helpless Good Side might do it in order to bluff some bad guys he'd otherwise have to fight. There can be many reasons.
 See also Impersonating the Evil Twin and Mask of Sanity."
Identity Amnesia|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/IdentityAmnesia|"Amnesia comes easy in fiction. It is also conveniently specific. A taste of Applied Phlebotinum, a particularly shocking traumatic event, or even a simple Tap on the Head will be sufficient to make your character forget all about who or what they are.
 In most cases, the character has simply lost their memories, no longer remembering their name, loved ones or where they came from. This is often the cause for a Quest for Identity.
 Sometimes, however, it is their personality that has changed. Not only do they not remember who they were, they are convinced that they are someone else entirely. In essence, Bob doesn't just forget that he's Bob, but he thinks he's Alice instead...
 The affected character may have additional amnesia on top of their personality change, but it's not a guarantee. It's possible they may still know everything they did prior to the switch, except that they've never before acted the way they're acting now. Attempts to get them to remember previous life-defining events that may snap them out of it are likely to be met with a stern dismissal: ""Why do you keep talking about this ""Bob"" guy?! I haven't time for this! I'm a world-famous opera singer and must be on stage in one hour!""
 Just like other forms of TV amnesia, this variety is often rectified by just smacking the character in the head a second time; they are usually very resistant to seeking out help on their own. As far as they're concerned, nothing is wrong.
 Once restored, they'll probably have no recollection of their amnesia-induced alter ego, and will probably be puzzled as to why time has moved forward by several hours/days.
 Once their Jekyll & Hyde nature has been demonstrated, it's a foregone conclusion that should the character in question get tapped on the head at a later date, the alternate persona will be right back in the saddle again.
 A vast exaggeration of a Truth in Television mental disorder, known as a ""Fugue State"". This is when someone believes themselves to be someone completely different. They may move to a different town and assume a different identity, without being aware the new identity is false. It is a very, very rare result of a psychotic break. Dissociative amnesia can also parallel this trope, but also under very rare and extreme circumstances.
 Clinical identity amnesia is the inability to identify with things you have done or said. You still remember who you are, but have no memory of having done certain things. You're just as likely (or more) to disown good deeds as bad ones.
 See also Brainwashed, Easy Amnesia, Fake Memories, We Want Our Jerk Back!, Wistful Amnesia, Amnesiac Hero, and Amnesiac Lover. Not to be confused with I Am Who?"
Jekyll & Hyde|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/JekyllAndHyde|"When a character and his Evil Twin, Evil Counterpart, or Shadow Archetype are really the same guy after all. Or, sometimes, a completely different character is sharing body space with another. The point is, the villain lives inside the hero's body, and therefore hides in plain sight. The hero is trying to catch himself.
 If the two personalities are aware of each other, this becomes a case of Gollum Made Me Do It. For a more mundane version, see Mood-Swinger. See In Vino Veritas if the change is alcohol-induced (you could call it ""Dr Jekyll and Mr Jack Daniels""). As an evil Hyde personality's crimes are outside the good Jekylls control and the Jekyll is usually unable to stop the Hyde emerging, this is often a case of being Driven to Villainy.
 Sometimes, though, the Hyde is not really evil; it may just be more instinctual or capable of using violence when necessary... See Wikipedia Behavior for the wiki version of this, also known as ""Dr. Pedia and Mr. Trope"". Also, a ""Jekyll"" persona isn't necessarily entirely ""good"" either  it may just be subtler or more self-controlled. After all, in the original story, Jekyll created Hyde as an outlet for his darker impulses, thus acknowledging that he had such impulses. Occasionally, the situation can be resolved (not necessarily favorably) with a Split-Personality Takeover, or with a Split-Personality Merge that reconciles both sides into a healthy whole. See also Superpowered Evil Side and Helpless Good Side.
 The trope name comes, of course, from The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, by Robert Louis Stevenson. The dual nature of Jekyll was actually originally a Twist Ending in the case of that story, but the book became famous and now it no longer surprises anyone. Most adaptations of the work focus on the dichotomy from the start. Other occurrences of the trope may still manage to surprise if theyre well done.
 The real-life example of Deacon Brodie (cabinet-making pillar of the church by day, burglar by night) is said to have inspired Stevenson, as did the story of Horace Wells, a pioneer of medical anesthetics. While researching chloroform by testing various dosages on himself, Wells unknowingly built up a dangerous level of the drug in his system, and ultimately attacked two prostitutes with sulfuric acid in a state of intoxicated paranoia. He then committed suicide after sobering up and learning what he had done.
 Since the fact that the hero and the villain are the same person could often be used as a twist ending, beware of spoilers on this page.
 See also Hyde Plays Jekyll, when the Hyde personality is in control and pretends to be Jekyll in order to fool others."
The Killer in Me|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TheKillerInMe|"A character (usually the main character, but sometimes sharing equal billing) is chasing or being chased by a killer or monster. A lot of people end up dead, but not this character, and in the end we find out why: the ""hero"" was the villain all along.
 The Amnesiac Killer is the more common variation, primarily because it's easier to write, as the audience is taken through the same reveal as the character himself. The Secretive Killer is particularly hard to pull off with the main protagonist (a minor protagonist is more commonly used for this reason) since the audience is always told the story from their perspective. If the events are shown directly, maintaining the twist right until the end therefore runs the risk of either Out Of Character Moments or losing focus on the character to conceal their real identity. A reliable method is to have the events (re)told through an Unreliable Narrator.
 In many cases, the Amnesiac Killer is essentially a Memory Gambit told In Medias Res. A Split Personality is common; see Alternate Identity Amnesia. This trope could be the result of a HeelFace Brainwashing. In Speculative Fiction, this may be due to a Superpowered Evil Side or Enemy Within.
 When handled with care, it can be a powerful Twist Ending. When tacked on just for the sake of surprising the audience, however, it is likely that key events in the story will become illogical, or in the worst case, physically impossible.
 Compare Tomato in the Mirror, in which the character finds out some other truth about who or what they are.
 Note: This is a Spoilered Rotten trope, that means that EVERY SINGLE EXAMPLE on this list is a spoiler by default and will be unmarked. This is your last warning, only proceed if you really believe you can handle this list."
Literal Split Personality|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/LiteralSplitPersonality|"A character gets split into two or more copies of themself, each of which reflects some facet of their personality. This can be similar to Evil Twin, but the split need not be along the good/evil axis. Sometimes seen as part of a Journey to the Center of the Mind. When this is not the case, it's usually an effect of the Applied Phlebotinum of the week.
 Often the parts have to work together, as none of them is individually capable of what the original character was. Sometimes, as they spend more time together, they start to become more like each other. Ultimately, they may come back together through a Fusion Dance that is also a Split-Personality Merge.
 Compare Enemy Without, but the components are not necessarily enemies, and unlike in Enemy Without none has any particular claim on being the ""original"" version. Also compare Self-Duplication, which is similar in appearance, if nothing else. Contrast Fusion Dance, where two or more beings become one being.
 Not to be confused with Half the Man He Used to Be."
Living Memory|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/LivingMemory|"The flesh is weak compared to the mind, heart and soul, especially when in the throes of passionate emotion. Some places are especially malleable to psychic phenomena. Combine the two and you have the Living Memory, an echo of a person who either is still alive or has definitively gone on to a final reward (or punishment).
 The Living Memory is a very strange ""being"" and similar to ghosts in a lot of ways. Physically they're usually intangible (though Your Mind Makes It Real can make them dangerous regardless), but some are in physical (though probably non-human) bodies. They may be fully sapient and can be reasoned with, a chunk of memories with a bit of personality, or just vinyl records on an endless loop. What they all have in common is that they are not the real deal, the original, just an eerie simulacrum... and some even realize it.
 When characters encounter a living memory, it's usually a highly emotional encounter. The Living Memory may distress the character emotionally, try to attack them... or offer encouragement and absolution for past sins. Like we said, Living Memories are strange.
 Compare Ghost Memory, where someone's memories are implanted or transferred into someone else's mind. See also the Pensieve Flashback, where characters enter a memory as observers."
Many Spirits Inside of One|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/ManySpiritsInsideOfOne|"Some people are victims of Demonic Possession or Grand Theft Me. Others have to struggle with the Enemy Within or even an outright Superpowered Evil Side. All those things are terrible in their own way but don't worry, it can always go From Bad to Worse. It's one thing when your body is taken by the lord of all evil himself, but when he invites his twelve best drinking buddies to join the ride, that's something else entirely.
 This trope is what you get if you exaggerate Demonic Possession or Enemy Within. Instead of having one evil/antagonistic being taking over somebody, it's multiple ones. Somebody doesn't have just Jekyll & Hyde inside his headit's Jekyll, Hyde, Steve, and Edmund. And Zoidberg.
 The Trope Namer is a song by HammerFall, based on the famous biblical tale of Legion, man possessed by multiple demons, which is obviously the Trope Codifier. Contrast I Am Legion, another trope named after this tale (and a story in The Bible), which occurs when members of a group start referring to themselves as a group, rather than individual people, implying that they lost their individuality or at least see themselves as a community or partners.
 Compare Mind Hive and Split-Personality Team, similar tropes involving multiple minds/personalities simultaneously inhabiting one body, but are more or less in accord with each other. Many Real Life multiples describe their experience this way rather than in mental-illness terms."
Mind Hive|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/MindHive|"As a Hive Mind is one mind, many bodies, a Mind Hive is the opposite - many minds, one body.
 The minds/consciousnesses/souls/whatnot of different people are housed within one body, most likely through magical or technological means. The minds can communicate with each other, and normally actions are through consensus.
 Distinct from Split Personality because even if what's housed inside is totally separate entities that got merged, they still retain their individuality. Sometimes may speak in I Am Legion pattern. Compare Sharing a Body, Two Beings, One Body, and Many Spirits Inside of One. Contrast Merger of Souls. See also Animal Eye Spies."
Multi-Gendered Split Personalities|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/MultiGenderedSplitPersonalities|"Split Personalities are weird things. They can have completely opposing personality traits to the main personality, different skills sometimes... But perhaps one of the oddest from a logical standpoint is when a split personality is actually a different gender from the main personality and from the body they control.
 How exactly they rationalize this gender incongruity can vary and tends to depend on Alternate Identity Amnesia. Some may see their own body as fitting their perceived sex. Some may simply ignore it. Some may consider themselves transgender. Some may believe their body was physically changed when they were unconscious (which the audience may be led to believe as well). Every mental coping mechanism will be a brain-twister, however.
 Mixing in actual forms of Gender Bender can add a new layer of complexity: A personality fronting may involve an extreme Split-Personality Makeover where the body changes sex to match them. Conversely, when The Mind Is a Plaything of the Body, the dysphoria brought on by a transformation can cause dissociated identities of different gender. And this is without getting into opposite sex individuals that ended up Sharing a Body.
 Compare Super Gender-Bender for when your other gender split personality has superpowers.
 Truth in Television for real-world multiples (including but not limited to Dissociative Identity Disorder), for whom this is a very normal, routine occurrence along with selves of different races, ages and even species coexisting."
Not Himself|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/NotHimself|"A close relative of Evil Twin and ""Freaky Friday"" Flip, Not Himself is any plot where a character acts contrary to the way they normally behave. Can be used to provide a mystery to be solved, or to incite bewilderment in the other characters. The deviation is often a marked increase in evil, insanity, and/or horniness: the emergence of the inner shadowor a switcheroo.
 Sometimes, it's a detective or police character behaving as if they were corrupt, or a criminal. This will usually turn out to be the Fake Defector. On other occasions, it might be the result of Demonic Possession.
 If the change is deliberate to save their friends, it's an invoked Out-of-Character Alert.
 If the change is caused by poor writing or is never given an in-canon reason, this could be Character Derailment.
 Compare Out-of-Character Moment and Weirder Than Usual. Contrast with Something Only They Would Say. See also Virus-Victim Symptoms. Not to be confused with Not as You Know Them, where an established character's significance in a production is derailed or minimized order to benefit another character (usually to replace them)."
Sexier Alter Ego|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SexierAlterEgo|"This trope is for characters of any gender that have an alternate form or identity that is much sexier than their normal mode. It's not necessarily because their ""civilian"" mode is ugly, but it is generally more mundane or otherwise less appealing than their ""heroic"" mode. Depending on the genre, the changes can be accomplished through either regular means such as acting and swapping wardrobes or though various magical or phlebotinum-driven methods. This usually involves a change in a character's physical appearance, but sometimes it's purely a change in personality traits and behavior, suggesting that the character in question is deliberately making themselves appear unattractive to hide their Secret Identity.
 Given that sexual attractiveness is subjective, the best examples are those when the sexier nature of the alternate form is shown from the perspective of another character reacting to them with subtle flirting and innuendo that otherwise wouldn't be present. That said, it's generally pretty clear when the creators of the story are trying to change someone from Hollywood Homely (or even downright ugly) into Ms. Fanservice or a Head-Turning Beauty.
 This often overlaps with Split Personality, Shapeshifting, Older Alter Ego, and Superpowered Alter Ego.
 Compare A Darker Me. Compare also to Shapeshifting Seducer where a shapeshifter capable of assuming many forms takes on several in an attempt to appeal to a specific person. She Cleans Up Nicely should be used for when a character changes from their usually dull or unattractive wardrobe, hairstyle and such to be more attractive (particularly at a formal event) however this new appearance is not associated with an alter ego or alternate physical form. Also see Evil Is Sexy.
 See also Bishounen Line for when a monstrous character gets sexier once they hit a certain power level, and With Great Power Comes Great Hotness when they get more attractive with power in general."
Shadow Archetype|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/ShadowArchetype|"Shadow Archetype has to do with two elements of writing: characters and settings. In this article we discuss character archetypes. For the settings viewpoint, see Shadowland.
 Character-wise, it's the part of the personality that embodies everything a character, called the 'Self', doesn't like about themselves, the things they (often subconsciously) deny about themselves and project on to others. In fact, the more the Shadow has been repressed, the more powerful it becomes. To show these things to the audience we need an embodiment of some sort.
 Around here, we call some of those embodiments things like:
 Those tropes have examples listed of characters playing those more-precise Shadow roles that often overlap with this but do not have to.
 A common trope involves the Self accepting their Shadow, metaphorically coming to terms with their flaw (see I Am What I Am). That is, The Hero refuses to kill the Shadow, given the opportunity, or outright refuses to fight it. In Enemy Within, Enemy Without, and Evil Twin situations, the Self and Shadow sometimes even merge towards the end for an endgame powerup, further emphasizing the symbolism.
 Note that in Jungian psychology, the Shadow Archetype includes positive as well as negative things, anything suppressed or denied in the personality. Compare and contrast Foil and Mirror Character which highlight traits a character has or lacks."
Split at Birth|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitAtBirth|"A Speculative Fiction variant of Separated at Birth: Our hero meets a character who appears at first to be his long-lost twin - until it is revealed that they are, in fact, the same person split in infancy by Applied Phlebotinum.
 Often the ""twins"" are characterized as inverses (either Polar Opposite Twins or Evil Twin) since the original's personality traits were divided unevenly between them (e.g. one ""twin"" got all the confidence, leaving the other timid and introverted). Note, however, that the ""twin"" is not necessarily evil or even antagonistic; he may simply be an alternate version of the character.
 See Separated at Birth if the character is a real twin."
Split Personality|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitPersonality|"A character's mind is split between two or more personalities. Usually, these personalities will have distinct traits, motivations, and memories. They may or may not be able to interact with one another (or even be aware of each other's existence). Control over the character's mind and body will often switch between these personalities against their will, causing problems for both themself and everyone around them.
 Fictional split personalities can be similar to a real-life condition, Dissociative Identity Disorder (or DID). DID is a mental disorder in which more than one distinct personality can be observed at different times within a single individual's brain, often associated with extreme long-term childhood trauma. The individual has no control over when their personalities ""switch"", and may not remember what they did or what happened to them while another personality was active (dissociative amnesia). DID has often been mischaracterized in the media, and its status remains controversial to this day.
 Split personalities have been represented in many different ways over the years. Though characters with such conditions are surprisingly common in fiction, most of them don't match the textbook definitions of DID. The most common case shown is where two (or more) personalities switch with one another; some depictions show people experiencing life as one person (i.e. having the same mind, memory and desires) but with modes of behavior that switch between distinct states.
 The most common usage of split personalities is a Jekyll & Hyde scenario, where a person has a ""good"" personality, and a ""bad"" one. Switching between these personalities might be signified by visual changes. The ""good"" personality may have trouble controlling the ""bad"" one, which may come out at inopportune times, bully the ""good"" personality into cooperating, or try to take over entirely. If theyre lucky, the character may be able to merge their personalities back together, allowing them to function as a single (and usually greater) mind.
 Compare and contrast with Double Consciousness, Mind Hive, Sharing a Body, Two Beings, One Body, and Talking to Themself. May overlap with Identity Amnesia. Also compare Many Spirits Inside of One, where a person is possessed by multiple independent spirits; and Napoleon Delusion, where a person falsely believes their body is inhabited by the spirit of a famous figure. When this happens to a superhero, it's often a Superpowered Evil Side. Shapeshifting is sometimes involved. If the personalities go back and forth, Flip Personality ensues.
 If the two personalities are aware of each other, expect a Gollum Made Me Do It situation to develop. Resolving it may require the weaker of the two to say ""I'm Not Afraid of You!"" If the Split Personality gets its own body it becomes either a Literal Split Personality or Enemy Without (if said personality is antagonistic or evil). See also Heroic Safe Mode for one explanation as to how a side like this can be created."
Split-Personality Makeover|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitPersonalityMakeover|"When dealing with a character that has a Split Personality, there will frequently be a striking visual difference depending on who is ""in control."" It's not a literal transformation, like the original Jekyll and Hyde; it's still recognizably the same person, but the differences will be visible. This may include anything from subtle stylistic changes (the character's design becomes more hard and angular when an evil or aggressive personality is in control, but softer and more rounded when a kind and good personality is in control) to more physical things like changes in hairstyle and black bags under the eyes. A significant vocal shift is common as well.
 Some of these changes are perfectly possible to do without physically altering the person's body, like the personalities having hair that's styled differently (or one of them not styling it at all and another styling it neatly) but the same length, or changes in body language and posture, or talking differently without completely changing voice actors, but others are firmly in the realm of Artistic License.
 These changes may or may not be noticed in-universe; if they are, expect them to treat the change as something intangible. They'll comment ""he's like someone completely different now!"" or ""that's not the person I know!"" rather than ""hey, when did you get your hair cut?"" or ""did your voice just drop two octaves?""."
Split-Personality Merge|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitPersonalityMerge|"So Bob is also Charlie, maybe even with a little Albert hiding in there somewhere. There are many possible reasons for the existence of these split personalities, but this co-habitation is rarely peaceful or long lasting, inevitably resulting in a Battle in the Center of the Mind to try and find out which personality will take over. Sometimes though, the winner might not reduce the loser to a tiny, powerless voice or destroy it completely, and instead offers to become one again. With a little Epiphany Therapy, Applied Phlebotinum or even actual psychotherapy, they merge into a single, whole person that is greater than the sum of its minds.
 The resulting merged personality is usually a composite of the parts that is well and truly psychologically stable. This is especially true if they were an id, ego, and super ego. If they were moral or temperamental opposites, the resulting merged personality will keep traits of both. In more action-driven works, this merger includes combat ability and powers, so if the character had a moron and a badass coexisting, the united whole will be a badass all the time... while occasionally tripping on banana peels. Similarly, if the reason for the personality split was to seal awesome cosmic powers away (resulting in a Superpowered Evil Side; see both Enemy Within and Enemy Without) the united self will have full control over these powers without risk of Super-Power Meltdown or corruption. If the integration isn't a completely smooth ride, however, expect aftereffects similar to Amnesiac Dissonance.
 This has notably been the accepted method of treatment of those with Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID) by psychiatrists."
Split-Personality Switch Trigger|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitPersonalitySwitchTrigger|"A Split Personality doesn't always switch at random. Many of them have a specific trigger associated with one or more personalities that cause them to come to the forefront. The large majority of examples use anger as the trigger, but there are some that are more specific. Examples that are Played for Drama might have the trigger be associated with some episode of the characters' Dark and Troubled Past.
Played for Laughs examples tend to make the trigger an Amusing Injury, particularly a bop to the head, which can even lead to the development of a split personality if the person doesn't already have one (but only in fiction). A Switch Trigger can also be added to the personality after the fact by a psychologist or the like, to help the afflicted person cope with their disorder better.
 There are three ways this trope can be used, depending on what kind of Split Personality the person has:
 Over the course of the story, the personality in question may become able to overpower the Trigger and stay in the driver's seat.
 This is Truth in Television; real cases of DID are the result of severe trauma experienced in childhood, and as such, the factors associated with such trauma will cause the alternate personality to take over and protect the person from being reminded of their past.
 Compare Trigger Phrase, a set of words that causes various effects on its target, and might be this trope if they have a Split Personality. Can overlap with Split-Personality Makeover or The Hat Makes the Man if the trigger involves changing the character's appearance."
Split-Personality Takeover|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitPersonalityTakeover|"After months or years of suffering a Split Personality, Enemy Within, or Superpowered Evil Side, the character is cured! ...by having the weaker, ""sane"" personality lose all control over the body to their inner evil. Like the slow erosion of a mountain, Jekyll has succumbed to Hyde's implacable id-like force, leaving nothing but the shell of who they were.
 This isn't just an identity crisis or something that can be wished away with good intentions, at least not easily. This is the permanent and literal death of a person  or at least a personality.
 This is especially common if one personality is more dominant than the other, or the ""good"" personality is subject to Mind Rape or a Heroic BSoD. Occasionally, a truly strong-willed ""good"" personality can do the takeover  although it's likelier that they'll choose to ""merge"" or reintegrate with their evil side into a ""whole"" personality because Good Is Impotent.
 If the takeover is incomplete, expect to see signs that the original is Fighting from the Inside. Antonym to Split-Personality Merge. Compare and contrast with Copied the Morals, Too, where some sort of evil clone or knockoff of a heroic character somehow inherits the heroic character's morality, much to the detriment of the villain's plan. When this is induced by outside brainwashing, it may be Brainwashing for the Greater Good."
Split-Personality Team|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SplitPersonalityTeam|"Split Personalities aren't always hostile to the original or radically different in Character Alignment. Sometimes the personalities are different in complementary rather than strictly antagonistic ways. Sometimes they even have common goals.
 In a Split Personality Team, a character's multiple personalities have a ""division of labor"" in which each personality takes charge during a particular emotion, challenge, or aspect of life. The personalities that take over during these special circumstances generally have skills or psychological traits that suit them for the job. A common variation is a more resilient or even badass personality that surfaces during moments of extreme stress if the core personality is psychologically fragile.
 The Split-Personality Team is less horror-oriented than other Split Personality Tropes, because the alternates are generally on the core personality's side, or at least looking out for their shared welfare. It's more commonly used in psychologically oriented stories exploring the complexity of a character's fractured mind. Some Real Life accounts of Dissociative Identity Disorder report a similar phenomenon, which may have inspired the trope. DID patients in therapy may, rather than setting a goal of merging into one personality, choose to work toward a psychologically healthy Split Personality Team.
 May involve Talking to Themself. Compare Mind Hive and some instances of Multiple Head Case. Multiform Balance is the shapeshifter version."
Super-Powered Alter Ego|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SuperpoweredAlterEgo|"The case where a being is able to engage in superheroics or grand villainy not by gaining any powers or by being a Badass Normal, but by being a vessel in some fashion for another personality that does have superpowers, but only when that personality takes control.
 This personality can also look and be physically very different. This takes several superhero/villain issues and solves them in a single stroke. They don't need a disguise because you wouldn't be able to tell by looking at them. Normally, however, writers will not remove the issue of being discovered; they'll use the single moment of transformation as a time where the secret can be discovered or requires the hero diving off into that phone booth. They just don't have to constantly worry about the issue. They can keep the superhero relatable by having the non-powered character be The Everyman or Ordinary High-School Student. They also won't have the same ""using your powers for selfish gain"" issue because a complete personality change can't be used so easily.
 The transformation can often be handled by a Transformation Sequence. Issues about how the personality is split off can vary. Sometimes it's like it's just another person hiding inside their body until the right moment, other times it's a total personality shift but they'll retain the memories of being that Superpowered Alter Ego and it will still be them. Maybe some Fan Wank, or even deliberate ambiguity, will occur over how much the alter ego is a separate personality at all or whether it's more of a Super Mode or Henshin Hero with a confidence boost.
 When the superpowered side is evil, then it is, rather unsurprisingly, the subtrope Superpowered Evil Side. This trope itself is the subtrope of Sharing a Body."
Superpowered Evil Side|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SuperpoweredEvilSide|"The fight's not going so well for our hero. He's wounded and at the end of his strength, and his barely scratched opponent looks down at him and sneers. And then the hero somehow suddenly taps into a massive hidden power source within him and unleashes a can of whoopass on his opponent.
 Unfortunately, it's not exactly the hero anymore. He's got glowing eyes, some new Facial Markings, a different way of talking, some new threads, and a lot less compunction about ripping someone in half. It's his Super-Powered Evil Side. Think of it as the Enemy Within when it's not the enemy, or as Jekyll and super-Hyde.
 Interestingly, notwithstanding the name, this character isn't necessarily evil  he just seems like it because a superpowerful version of a normal person who has no compunctions about randomly destroying things registers objectively as ""evil"" on most people's scale. To be technically accurate, this is more of a Super-Powered Alter Id  this personality is the physical manifestation of the character's basic drives without having to deal with the inconvenience of higher thought processes and morality  but sometimes this character will have traits of actually being evil or even worse.
 Keep in mind, of course, that as the Id not only represents ones most base and primal desires, it also represents the instincts to survive, so once its let out of the subconscious it's not likely to want to go back in. Thus, the hero faces the very real threat of not returning to normal, each bout of Alternate Identity Amnesia causing him to get more worried about the next. Generally speaking, though, he's usually safe unless he starts thinking Evil Feels Good.
 The narrative purpose of having a super-powered evil side is that it provides a way of saving a hero who is otherwise beaten but without making the hero look disproportionately powerful. It answers the question ""why doesn't he just do that all the time?"" with ""because then the evil would take over."" Additionally, if it leads to a FaceHeel Turn, it can serve the same purpose as Good Is Dumb in reverse  it justifies taking one member of the Five-Man Band or whatever and making him a match for his entire team while he has given in to evil. Alternatively, the evil side may escape his mind/body altogether, becoming a very dangerous Evil Counterpart.
 This is the converse of With Great Power Comes Great Insanity, seeing as in this case, with great insanity comes great power.
 One possible variation on this trope makes the Evil Side the original personality. This creates the odd situation of an ""Evil"" super-powerful monster whose ""Good"" not-as-powerful personality is dominant for whatever reason.
 This is sometimes the reason to Beware the Nice Ones. Compare with Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass, Demonic Possession, Jekyll & Hyde and One-Winged Angel. Frequently overlaps with Sealed Evil in a Can and Sealed Badass in a Can. Contrast Heroic Resolve, My Name Is Inigo Montoya, and Helpless Good Side, although that last one sometimes goes hand in hand with this. May be caused by The Corruption. One possible way of Taking A Level In Badass, and in many ways, this is what The Berserker does.
 Sub-Trope of Enemy Within and Super-Powered Alter Ego. If the Super-Powered Evil Side is triggered by the character's anger or rage, then it is a type of Hulking Out."
Talking to Themself|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TalkingToThemself|"It seems that in fiction split personalities can talk to each other, manifesting as Hearing Voices. Sometimes the various personalities will talk to each other inside the character's head, sometimes one of them (by implication the ""real"" or ""dominant"" one) will talk out loud, and sometimes they'll all talk out loud, being distinguished by cinematography, facial expression or vocal differences. While different people in a multiple personality group can and do talk to each other, this is of course exaggerated for dramatic purposes in media portrayals of multiple personalities  see Split Personality for a more in-depth explanation.
 Even entirely sane (or mostly sane) people can be prone to this trope if the other voices represent simple conflicting desires like ""brain versus heart"", ""id versus superego"", or Good Angel, Bad Angel.
 Compare Holding Both Sides of the Conversation, where one person is pretending to be two different people (at the same time, in conversation) in order to maintain some charade. This is a specific form of Shifting Voice of Madness, where the ""voices"" are in conversation with each other.
 Very important: do not confuse Thinking Out Loud with this. Thinking Out Loud is not a symptom of mental illness in most casesnote(and is actually a recommended coping mechanism for ADD/ADHD, some learning disabilities, recovering from a stimulant drug addiction, or similar attention or concentration deficit issues).
 For instances of a person who is literally speaking to another version of themself due to things such as Cloning Blues, Literal Split Personality, or Time Travel, see Which Me?. For instances of an actor voicing multiple characters (which were named ""Talking to Himself""), see Acting for Two.
 In Real Life, multiple-personality selves do talk to each other (including talking out loud, discreetly) or can learn to do so. This communication is actually a good sign and is encouraged by doctors."
Twin Test|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TwinTest|"The twin test is a quiz in which identical siblings ask other characters to point out which sibling is which. This can be done in a variety of ways, most commonly with the twins asking someone to identify them either face-to-face or using photos.
 The twin test is often Played for Laughs, especially with Trickster Twins. If someone is particularly good at the test, the siblings may become obsessed with stumping them, escalating the difficulty of the test to absurd levels by dressing the same, adopting similar mannerisms, or even pretending to be the other twin. Single-Minded Twins giving a twin test are typically played for laughs with the joke being that the obvious lack of distinct personalities between the two will make answering correctly a matter of chance. The justifications a character gives for their answer, regardless of whether they were right or wrong, are ripe with comedic potential.
 When Played for Drama, if most people fail the test, at least one of the siblings may become withdrawn or jaded about the nature of their own individuality. It may also jump-start a desire for one sibling to differentiate themselves as much as possible from the other and distancing themself from their sibling(s) in the process. Expect someone who consistently passes to be considered a True Companion or One True Love, since only someone who really gets the siblings can pass the test.
 If siblings have Identical Twin ID Tag or experienced Twin Desynch, they are far less likely to give a twin test since the answer would be obvious (though savvy twins can exploit this). In more fantastical or action-oriented stories that include an Evil Twin, a twin test may be used to confuse or thwart The Hero and is likely to include raising the stakes of answering incorrectly into a Matter of Life and Death.
 This trope also applies to Split Personality Tropes if one (or multiple) personalities asks a character if they can tell when a given personality is in control. Since typically no two personalities can be present at the same time (unless you're dealing with Literal Split Personalities), this is likely to happen over the long run, spanning multiple smaller tests.
 Compare and contrast Spot the Imposter and Impostor-Exposing Test, which similarly focuses on a character correctly identifying another from a doppleganger. What separates this trope from those is that while the twin test can include one sibling pretending to be another, this is not fundamental and typically the twins present genuine representations of themselves. Similarly, in the case of split personalities, a twin test may involve Hyde Plays Jekyll, but it is not necessary for the trope.
 See also Twin Switch and Identical Twin Mistake. Making Use of the Twin can sometimes serve as a Real Life version of this trope for viewers."
Two-Person Love Triangle|https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TwoPersonLoveTriangle|"Some people get into a Love Triangle with themselves. Sometimes this gets resolved, if it's a case of Mistaken Identity; sometimes it really doesn't, if they have to maintain a Secret Identity. A very common, very old form is two kids, each chafing against their separate Arranged Marriages, meet and fall in love before they realize their betrothal is to each other, clearing up any and all moral ambiguity or conflict of duties that had driven the story up till that point. Another common version is what we might call the 'superhero' version  the superhero's Mild Mannered Alter-Ego is head-over-heels for a person who won't give them the time of day... because they're head-over-heels for the superhero.
 Taken even further, this can happen with Split Personalities, in which one character is involved with multiple different personalities of the same person. Whether or not all parties are aware of this fact is often what will determine whether this is Played for Laughs or Played for Drama, with more tragic portrayals being the ones in which everyone is well aware and suffering because of it. If Split-Personality Makeover is acknowledged in-universe, then this could justify the situation.
 See Loves My Alter Ego and Acquainted in Real Life. Compare Imaginary Love Triangle, which involves three people but is likewise built on false assumptions. May involve Likes Clark Kent, Hates Superman."
